_project/general_remarks.md, before:

---
layout: default
title:  "General remarks"
parent: Project
categories: project
author : Lars Pastewka
nav_order: 0
---

# General remarks

## What you need before starting

The project will guide you through the process of writing your own MPI-parallel molecular dynamics code.
We will provide guidance for implementation details, but we will _not_ teach specific programmings skills.
Depending on your background, this means you may need to familarize yourself with a certain set of technologies.
In particular, we are assuming that you have some experience in working with the unix shell (bash). Note that you can find a tutorial can be found [here](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/).

You should have some experience with a programming languages, ideally C or C++.
C++ tutorials can be found
[here](https://hsf-training.github.io/hsf-training-cpp-webpage/01-introduction/index.html)
or [here](https://www.w3schools.com/cpp/), and there are many more available
online. For a more technical but exhaustive reference on the language and the
standard library, [cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com) should be your
main resource. Please familarize yourself with the basics of C++ (flow control,
variables, loops) etc. before embarking in the milestones. Note that many
generic features of imperative programming languages are quite similar and carry
over to each other. Even if you are unfamiliar with C++, it should be
straightforward to learn basic C++ features quickly. Advanced features of C++
can be complicated and confusing but we will comment on those throughout the
milestone when we require them.

## What you need to pass the class

You need to submit a [final written report](your_final_report) at the end of the class. Throughout the milestones, we will indicate the
types of results that we want documented in the report. Note that we do not expect anything from the first milestones,
but once you have a working code we will ask you to compute certain physical problems.

Commit message:

added link to C++ Core Guidelines

_project/general_remarks.md, after:

---
layout: default
title:  "General remarks"
parent: Project
categories: project
author : Lars Pastewka
nav_order: 0
---

# General remarks

## What you need before starting

The project will guide you through the process of writing your own MPI-parallel molecular dynamics code.
We will provide guidance for implementation details, but we will _not_ teach specific programmings skills.
Depending on your background, this means you may need to familarize yourself with a certain set of technologies.
In particular, we are assuming that you have some experience in working with the unix shell (bash). Note that you can find a tutorial can be found [here](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/).

You should have some experience with a programming languages, ideally C or C++.
C++ tutorials can be found
[here](https://hsf-training.github.io/hsf-training-cpp-webpage/01-introduction/index.html)
or [here](https://www.w3schools.com/cpp/), and there are many more available
online. The [C++ Core
Guidelines](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines) are an
excellent resource for best practices in C++. For a more technical but
exhaustive reference on the language and the standard library,
[cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com) should be your main resource. Please
familarize yourself with the basics of C++ (flow control, variables, loops) etc.
before embarking in the milestones. Note that many generic features of
imperative programming languages are quite similar and carry over to each other.
Even if you are unfamiliar with C++, it should be straightforward to learn basic
C++ features quickly. Advanced features of C++ can be complicated and confusing
but we will comment on those throughout the milestone when we require them.

## What you need to pass the class

You need to submit a [final written report](your_final_report) at the end of the class. Throughout the milestones, we will indicate the
types of results that we want documented in the report. Note that we do not expect anything from the first milestones,
but once you have a working code we will ask you to compute certain physical problems.
