_notes/references_and_pointers.md, before:

---
layout: default
title:  "C++ References and Pointers"
parent: Notes
categories: notes
author : Lucas Frérot
nav_order: 1
---

# C++ References and Pointers

References and pointers can cause confusion for beginners: this note aims to
clarify what references and pointers are good at, what are their differences and
how they can be used in C++.

## Passing function arguments

Programming language often distinguish themselves in how function arguments are
passed to functions. In C++, function arguments can typically be passed in three
ways:

- Pass-by-value
- Pass-by-reference
- Pass-by-address

Function arguments that are passed by value are essentially copied when passed
to the function that is called. In a language like Python for example, scalar
variables are passed by value. Function arguments that are passed by reference
are not copied: the variable available in the function *refers* to the variable
that was passed to the function.

Let us look at a C++ function that takes its arguments *by-value*.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int x) {
    x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

The output of this program is:

```
value of x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 2
```

This means that the value of `y` was copied into the function argument `x`. Now
here is the same code, but the argument of `increment()` passed by reference.

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int& x) {
    x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

The output of this program is:

```
value of x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 3
```

The variable `x` inside the function `increment` *refers* to the variable `y`
outside the function. This has two common use cases:

- Modification of the variable within the function: functions can return values,
  but in imperative languages it is common to want to modify function arguments
  in addition to returning a value. This is known as a *side-effect* (i.e. when
  function arguments are modified). A relevant example would be to update
  particle velocities.
- Avoiding copies of large objects: scalar variables and short strings should be
  passed by value (this can save some bugs, and compilers can sometimes avoid
  the copy overhead), but large objects, such as arrays describing atoms
  positions, velocities, etc., should not be copied when they are passed on to
  functions. Passing by reference avoids this.

When one is in the second use case (copy needs to be avoided) but not in the
first case (arguments do not need, or should not, be modified), one can use a
*constant reference* argument.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

auto size(const std::vector<int>& x) {
    return x.size();
}

int main() {
    std::vector<int> v = {1, 2, 3, 4};
    std::cout << "size of vector: " << size(v) << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

### Pass-by-address

In C++, pointers are variables whose value is an address in memory. That address
*should* be the address of another existing variable, or the `nullptr` value,
which is an invalid address. Passing a variable to a function *by-address* means
that the address of that variable is copied into a pointer in the function.

Passing a variable by-address is conceptually the same as passing by-reference
(with a few edge case exceptions). However, in C++ practice, pointers are not
used the same as reference. Since pointers are variables that contain an
address, an extra step is needed to access the value of the addressed variable.
This step is called **dereferencing**. Syntactically, this is done with the `*`
operator: if `x` is a pointer (i.e. a variable containing an address), then `*x`
is the *dereferenced* value, that is the value contained at the memory address
`x`. Here is a code sample that does the exact same thing as the `increment`
function above with a reference argument:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int* x) {
    *x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
    std::cout << "value of *x in function: " << *x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(&y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Here is a sample output:

```
value of x in function: 0x7ffcc6017a84
value of *x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 3
```

Notice two things that changed with regard to the by-reference code above:

- In `main()`, the `increment()` function is called not with `y`, but with `&y`.
  The ampersand `&` prefix to the variable indicates that we *pass the address*
  of the variable `y`, not its value. Try to pass `y` instead of `&y` and the
  compiler will complain with a conversion error, because `int` and `int*` are
  different variable types and one cannot convert into the other.
- To access the actual value we are interested in , we need to do `*x`. The
  value of `x` is an address, as can be seen in the output.


#### The special case of member variables

One can access member variables of an object in C++ with the `.` operator, e.g.
`atoms.positions` is the variable `positions` inside the object `atoms`. This
assumes that the object `atoms` is of type `Atoms` or `Atoms&`, i.e. it is the
original object or a reference to that object. If `atoms` is of type `Atoms*`,
we need to dereference it *before* accessing the member variable. One issue is
that the dereferencing operator `*` has priority lower than the `.` operator.
This means that `*atoms.positions` is understood by the compiler as
`*(atoms.positions)` which is not what we want. A way to fix this is to use
parentheses to specify the operator priority: `(*atoms).positions` is what we
want, because we dereference `atoms` before accessing the `positions` variable.
Since this parentheses syntax is heavy, and accessing members of pointer
variables is so common, C++ has an equivalent syntax: `atoms->positions`. This
does the dereferencing before the member access and is exactly equivalent to
`(*atoms).positions`. Within class functions, it is common to use the `this`
pointer to refer to member variables with the syntax `this->positions`. The
`this` pointer points to the current object, and is the C++ equivalent of the
`self` object in Python.

## In-scope references

The above examples should cover 80% of use cases of references. Sometimes,
however, references need to be used outside of function arguments.
For example, this is the case for member variables that refer to variables
declared outside of an object's scope. A typical application of this could be a
class `AtomsIO` (that handles io, e.g. writing atoms to a file) that defines a
member variable `Atoms& atoms`. Such use cases are typically motivated by either
the need to avoid copy overhead or to have a single `atoms` object that is
shared between other objects.

References are declared just like any other variable, with a notable difference:
**references must always be initialized on declaration**. Here's an example:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int x = 2;
    int& y = x;

    y += 1;

    std::cout << "value of x: " << x << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Once a reference is declared (here `int& y = x`) it cannot be changed. In the
snippet above, `x` and `y` are effectively the same variable. Since all
references *must* be initialized on declaration, the code `int& y;` is invalid
and will cause a compiler error.

Similarly, if member variables are references, they **must** be initialized in the
[constructor initializer
list](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/constructor), see below:

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Foo {
    int& x;

    Foo(int& reference): x(reference) {
        x += 1;
        std::cout << "value of x in constructor: " << x << "\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    Foo foo(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside constructor: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

This use case is however prone to the [dangling
reference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/reference#Dangling_references)
problem, so pointer-based solutions with the smart pointers defined in the
[standard
library](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/header/memory#Smart_pointers) are
often preferred.

### In-scope pointers

The use cases described above for references are also valid use cases for
pointers, with one major caveat: pointers do not have to be initialized with a
valid address. This can cause all sorts of issues, because **dereferencing an
uninitialized or invalid pointer is undefined behavior**. If you are lucky, your
program will just crash. If you are unlucky, you will read/write data from/to a
place in memory that you should not have access to, and debugging that will be a
bad time. This is why C++ is infamous for being a "shoot yourself in the foot"
language.

Most of these problems come from the use of *raw pointers*, i.e. the kind of
pointer we have introduced above. These pointers do not have a concept of
*memory ownership*, i.e. you have no guarantee that the address stored in the
pointer is valid. Ideally, they should only be used in the context shown above,
where we pass-by-address and limit operations to the *dereferenced value*, not
the pointer itself (we do not change the address, or free the memory). Any other
use of *raw pointers* should be avoided as much as possible. Instead, the C++
standard library provides two **smart pointer** classes:
[`std::unique_ptr`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr) and
[`std::shared_ptr`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr). These
classes correctly manage ownership and should be preferred over references for
member variables that refer to objects outside the object scope (like the `Foo`
example above).

```cpp
#include <memory>
#include <iostream>

struct Foo {
    std::shared_ptr<int> x;

    Foo(std::shared_ptr<int> ptr): x(ptr) {
        *x += 1;
        std::cout << "value of *x in constructor: " << *x << "\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    std::shared_ptr<int> y = std::make_shared<int>(2);
    Foo foo(y);
    std::cout << "value of *y outside object: " << *y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Here we have used the function `std::make_shared` to allocate an `int` with the
value `2` and create a `std::shared_ptr` that points to the address of this
`int`.

Unfortunately, the smart pointer types do not exist in C, so one should always
be wary of pointers when using a C library (e.g. MPI, BLAS, LAPACK, PetSc, or
FFTW which are reference libraries for scientific computing).

## Further reading

References in C++ are broken down into two catergories: *lvalue* references and
*rvalue* references ("l" and "r" stand for "left" and "right"). This distinction
allows fine-grained object manipulation but may be too advanced for beginners.
The [cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/reference) page
details with examples the distinction between these references. It also defines
*forwarding references*.

Resource management is a sensitive endeavour in C++ and very error-prone. One
should familiarize themselves with the [C++ Core
Guidelines](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#S-resource)
on the subject, which provide a set of good practices.

Commit message:

added godbolt link to reference examples

_notes/references_and_pointers.md, after:

---
layout: default
title:  "C++ References and Pointers"
parent: Notes
categories: notes
author : Lucas Frérot
nav_order: 1
---

# C++ References and Pointers

References and pointers can cause confusion for beginners: this note aims to
clarify what references and pointers are good at, what are their differences and
how they can be used in C++.

## Passing function arguments

Programming language often distinguish themselves in how function arguments are
passed to functions. In C++, function arguments can typically be passed in three
ways:

- Pass-by-value
- Pass-by-reference
- Pass-by-address

Function arguments that are passed by value are essentially copied when passed
to the function that is called. In a language like Python for example, scalar
variables are passed by value. Function arguments that are passed by reference
are not copied: the variable available in the function *refers* to the variable
that was passed to the function.

Let us look at a C++ function that takes its arguments *by-value* ([interactive
link](https://godbolt.org/z/9jo6vb9Pv)).

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int x) {
    x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

The output of this program is:

```
value of x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 2
```

This means that the value of `y` was copied into the function argument `x`. Now
here is the same code, but the argument of `increment()` passed by reference
([interactive link](https://godbolt.org/z/PGxebEodG)).

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int& x) {
    x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

The output of this program is:

```
value of x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 3
```

The variable `x` inside the function `increment` *refers* to the variable `y`
outside the function. This has two common use cases:

- Modification of the variable within the function: functions can return values,
  but in imperative languages it is common to want to modify function arguments
  in addition to returning a value. This is known as a *side-effect* (i.e. when
  function arguments are modified). A relevant example would be to update
  particle velocities.
- Avoiding copies of large objects: scalar variables and short strings should be
  passed by value (this can save some bugs, and compilers can sometimes avoid
  the copy overhead), but large objects, such as arrays describing atoms
  positions, velocities, etc., should not be copied when they are passed on to
  functions. Passing by reference avoids this.

When one is in the second use case (copy needs to be avoided) but not in the
first case (arguments do not need, or should not, be modified), one can use a
*constant reference* argument ([interactive
link](https://godbolt.org/z/EEf5n1GGo)).

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>

auto size(const std::vector<int>& x) {
    return x.size();
}

int main() {
    std::vector<int> v = {1, 2, 3, 4};
    std::cout << "size of vector: " << size(v) << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

### Pass-by-address

In C++, pointers are variables whose value is an address in memory. That address
*should* be the address of another existing variable, or the `nullptr` value,
which is an invalid address. Passing a variable to a function *by-address* means
that the address of that variable is copied into a pointer in the function.

Passing a variable by-address is conceptually the same as passing by-reference
(with a few edge case exceptions). However, in C++ practice, pointers are not
used the same as reference. Since pointers are variables that contain an
address, an extra step is needed to access the value of the addressed variable.
This step is called **dereferencing**. Syntactically, this is done with the `*`
operator: if `x` is a pointer (i.e. a variable containing an address), then `*x`
is the *dereferenced* value, that is the value contained at the memory address
`x`. Here is a code sample that does the exact same thing as the `increment`
function above with a reference argument ([interactive
link](https://godbolt.org/z/xePc11oKo):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

void increment(int* x) {
    *x += 1;
    std::cout << "value of x in function: " << x << "\n";
    std::cout << "value of *x in function: " << *x << "\n";
}

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    increment(&y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside function: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Here is a sample output:

```
value of x in function: 0x7ffcc6017a84
value of *x in function: 3
value of y outside function: 3
```

Notice two things that changed with regard to the by-reference code above:

- In `main()`, the `increment()` function is called not with `y`, but with `&y`.
  The ampersand `&` prefix to the variable indicates that we *pass the address*
  of the variable `y`, not its value. Try to pass `y` instead of `&y` and the
  compiler will complain with a conversion error, because `int` and `int*` are
  different variable types and one cannot convert into the other.
- To access the actual value we are interested in , we need to do `*x`. The
  value of `x` is an address, as can be seen in the output.


#### The special case of member variables

One can access member variables of an object in C++ with the `.` operator, e.g.
`atoms.positions` is the variable `positions` inside the object `atoms`. This
assumes that the object `atoms` is of type `Atoms` or `Atoms&`, i.e. it is the
original object or a reference to that object. If `atoms` is of type `Atoms*`,
we need to dereference it *before* accessing the member variable. One issue is
that the dereferencing operator `*` has priority lower than the `.` operator.
This means that `*atoms.positions` is understood by the compiler as
`*(atoms.positions)` which is not what we want. A way to fix this is to use
parentheses to specify the operator priority: `(*atoms).positions` is what we
want, because we dereference `atoms` before accessing the `positions` variable.
Since this parentheses syntax is heavy, and accessing members of pointer
variables is so common, C++ has an equivalent syntax: `atoms->positions`. This
does the dereferencing before the member access and is exactly equivalent to
`(*atoms).positions`. Within class functions, it is common to use the `this`
pointer to refer to member variables with the syntax `this->positions`. The
`this` pointer points to the current object, and is the C++ equivalent of the
`self` object in Python.

## In-scope references

The above examples should cover 80% of use cases of references. Sometimes,
however, references need to be used outside of function arguments.
For example, this is the case for member variables that refer to variables
declared outside of an object's scope. A typical application of this could be a
class `AtomsIO` (that handles io, e.g. writing atoms to a file) that defines a
member variable `Atoms& atoms`. Such use cases are typically motivated by either
the need to avoid copy overhead or to have a single `atoms` object that is
shared between other objects.

References are declared just like any other variable, with a notable difference:
**references must always be initialized on declaration**. Here's an example
([interactive link](https://godbolt.org/z/5MsEhbs7z)):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    int x = 2;
    int& y = x;

    y += 1;

    std::cout << "value of x: " << x << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Once a reference is declared (here `int& y = x`) it cannot be changed. In the
snippet above, `x` and `y` are effectively the same variable. Since all
references *must* be initialized on declaration, the code `int& y;` is invalid
and will cause a compiler error.

Similarly, if member variables are references, they **must** be initialized in the
[constructor initializer
list](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/constructor), see below
([interactive link](https://godbolt.org/z/YbrqM5Wqj)):

```cpp
#include <iostream>

struct Foo {
    int& x;

    Foo(int& reference): x(reference) {
        x += 1;
        std::cout << "value of x in constructor: " << x << "\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    int y = 2;
    Foo foo(y);
    std::cout << "value of y outside constructor: " << y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

This use case is however prone to the [dangling
reference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/reference#Dangling_references)
problem, so pointer-based solutions with the smart pointers defined in the
[standard
library](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/header/memory#Smart_pointers) are
often preferred.

### In-scope pointers

The use cases described above for references are also valid use cases for
pointers, with one major caveat: pointers do not have to be initialized with a
valid address. This can cause all sorts of issues, because **dereferencing an
uninitialized or invalid pointer is undefined behavior**. If you are lucky, your
program will just crash. If you are unlucky, you will read/write data from/to a
place in memory that you should not have access to, and debugging that will be a
bad time. This is why C++ is infamous for being a "shoot yourself in the foot"
language.

Most of these problems come from the use of *raw pointers*, i.e. the kind of
pointer we have introduced above. These pointers do not have a concept of
*memory ownership*, i.e. you have no guarantee that the address stored in the
pointer is valid. Ideally, they should only be used in the context shown above,
where we pass-by-address and limit operations to the *dereferenced value*, not
the pointer itself (we do not change the address, or free the memory). Any other
use of *raw pointers* should be avoided as much as possible. Instead, the C++
standard library provides two **smart pointer** classes:
[`std::unique_ptr`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr) and
[`std::shared_ptr`](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr). These
classes correctly manage ownership and should be preferred over references for
member variables that refer to objects outside the object scope (like the `Foo`
example above; [interactive link](https://godbolt.org/z/vcMKGW1xM)).

```cpp
#include <memory>
#include <iostream>

struct Foo {
    std::shared_ptr<int> x;

    Foo(std::shared_ptr<int> ptr): x(ptr) {
        *x += 1;
        std::cout << "value of *x in constructor: " << *x << "\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    std::shared_ptr<int> y = std::make_shared<int>(2);
    Foo foo(y);
    std::cout << "value of *y outside object: " << *y << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

Here we have used the function `std::make_shared` to allocate an `int` with the
value `2` and create a `std::shared_ptr` that points to the address of this
`int`.

Unfortunately, the smart pointer types do not exist in C, so one should always
be wary of pointers when using a C library (e.g. MPI, BLAS, LAPACK, PetSc, or
FFTW which are reference libraries for scientific computing).

## Further reading

References in C++ are broken down into two catergories: *lvalue* references and
*rvalue* references ("l" and "r" stand for "left" and "right"). This distinction
allows fine-grained object manipulation but may be too advanced for beginners.
The [cppreference](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/reference) page
details with examples the distinction between these references. It also defines
*forwarding references*.

Resource management is a sensitive endeavour in C++ and very error-prone. One
should familiarize themselves with the [C++ Core
Guidelines](https://isocpp.github.io/CppCoreGuidelines/CppCoreGuidelines#S-resource)
on the subject, which provide a set of good practices.
